[Music]
attention earthlings recently new moon
research has shown that it's constantly
shrinking and shaking from huge quakes
what could that mean for our natural
satellite and for us what will happen if
the moon continues to shrink will it
shrink to the size of a baseball or just
you know explode put your thinking cap
on because it's time to delve into some
insane theories and what-ifs about the
Moon what what if the moon doesn't stop
shaking to kick things off here are some
puzzling facts about the Moon for you it
was once shaped like a donut it's mostly
made of magma launched into orbit from
the surface of the earth it's shrinking
and it's moving further away from us
with every passing year if all this
leaves you scratching your head then let
me elaborate the history of the moon
started 4.5 billion years ago very few
photos exist at that time the earth was
still a young planet covered with red
hot magma oceans at some point a huge
mars-sized object crashed into it the
impact was around 100 million times more
powerful than the asteroid that wiped
out the dinosaurs from the face of the
earth all this power launched the liquid
magma into space at first the mass took
the shape of a doughnut without a hole
thinner in the center and thicker near
the edges as time went by this proto
moon started to form into the sphere we
all know but would you be surprised to
know that it's not just an inactive rock
in the sky and that the moon is actually
still cooling down from its explosive
birth this is exactly why it's shrinking
every material raises its density as the
temperature lowers this leads to
shrinking ok the shrinking part is
explained but what about the shaking it
actually comes from the same process you
see as the hot core of the Moon is
cooled down in the last hundred million
years the moon has become thinner by
about 150 feet
of course this process wasn't easy on
the crust of the boat it's still moving
and pushing onto itself forming cracks
called scarps near these scarps the moon
is still pretty active trembling from
the underground quakes the giant impact
hypothesis of the moon's formation is
not a hot new thing in science but it
always had one big flaw if the moon was
formed by a mars-sized object hitting
the earth more than 1/2 of its mass
would consist of the remains of this
object existing evidence proves that
it's the exact opposite the moon is
unique in how similar it is to the earth
on April 29th 2019 a new study was
released by Natsuki hosono and his team
addressing this flaw by adding magma
oceans to the proto-earth this explained
the similarity between the moons and the
Earth's composition since it's much
easier to launch liquid magma into orbit
than solid material this is why the moon
now mostly consists of material from the
earth the study explaining the moon
shrinking and shaking processes appeared
shortly after on May 13th released by a
group of US scientists led by Thomas our
waters the most remarkable thing about
this study is that it's based on data
collected from seismometers placed on
the surface of the Moon by Apollo
astronauts it's mind-blowing how big
those steps were for humanity after all
before this study scientists had no idea
what caused the moon quakes but today
it's finally explained and we don't have
to worry about our moon impacting our
safety huh what a relief - what'll
happen if the moon keeps moving away
from the earth
maybe the shrinking of the moon won't
affect us but the other irreversible
process is posing a real threat or maybe
not at all ha ha let me explain the
thing is every year the moon is getting
about an inch and a half further from
the earth doesn't sound like much but
consider this at the time of its birth
the moon was only fourteen thousand
miles away from the earth and now it's
around 250,000 miles away
if you ever rode a merry-go-round then
you know exactly why the moon is
spinning away from us
the spinning itself creates a force
pushing out on the object the spins the
earth has the same problems as the moon
the moon is pulling a tidal bulge on the
Earth's oceans but that bulge doesn't
point directly to the moon because of
the earth spinning it points slightly
ahead of it the combination of these
powers is pushing back onto the moon
moving it away if the moon gets far
enough away its crucial influence on our
world will become less and less powerful
for example tides won't be as prominent
as they were before and that'll lead to
mass extinction fortunately this change
isn't coming tomorrow and the earth has
lots of time to prepare but there is
another problem the same process causes
the earth to slow down 3 what if the
moon slows down the earth believe it or
not when the moon was forming the earth
was spinning so fast that it took only
four hours for it to go full circle four
hours in a day is great for Monday's
maybe but overall it would be a problem
the moon's presence on the Earth's orbit
is what slowed our planet down so the
moon has extended our day by 19 hours
since its birth 4.5 billion years ago
the longer days are beneficial for life
on the earth but it's far from being
over
if you've ever asked for a 25th hour in
the day you'll eventually get it in the
next quarter of a billion years but you
might not be glad about it the Earth's
slowing down is not actually a great
thing the slower the earth the less
stable it is it'll start to wobble and
that'll affect the climate drastically
winters will be much colder and summers
will be hotter in such conditions
nothing would be able to adapt still the
good news is it's billions of years from
happening
for what if a giant asteroid hit them
all let's talk about something that
could happen almost instantly have you
ever noticed how the surface of the bone
is covered in craters these are the
imprints of countless impacts from
meteoroids and asteroids but what about
the earth thankfully the earth has an
atmosphere that the moon lacks this
atmosphere is our space shield if any
objects try to fall to the earth surface
friction will be generated setting the
object of blaze and burning it to ashes
a meteoroid would have to be more than
25 feet in size to go through the
atmosphere and not burn out anything
bigger than that might cause some
trouble even for the earth the moon is
much more vulnerable almost everything
that takes aim at it will hit it and do
a lot of damage but on the other hand
the moon doesn't have a fragile
ecosystem to protect so even a giant
asteroid doesn't pose much threat to it
it would just be another crater on the
surface to actually do significant
damage to the moon like to move it from
orbit it would take an object relatively
close in size to the moon itself and
that's not happening any time soon well
it seems like all the mysteries the moon
hides are not a mortal threat at least
not in the near hundreds of millions of
years at that point we'll probably live
on new planets all with their own new
moons
who knows today we're just taking our
first steps outside of our home planet
the second expedition to the moon is
planned for 2024 given the results of
the previous one I wonder how
significant this new flight will be and
what do you think the new moon
expedition will uncover share your ideas
in the comment section if you learned
something new today then give this video
a like and share it with a friend but
hey don't go anywhere just yet we have
over 2000 cool videos for you to check
out all you have to do is pick the left
or right video click on it and enjoy
stay on the bright side of life